README.md, before:

# LuaDB

## Getting Started
To get started, clone this repository on your local computer:

    git clone github.com/chrisrink10/luadb
    
You'll need a copy of [CMake](http://www.cmake.org) to generate the 
appropriate makefiles for your system. 

Follow the steps laid out below for your System.

### OS X and Other UNIX-like Systems
Follow these steps to compile LuaDB:

* Open a command prompt (such as `Terminal` for OS X) to your project 
  build location.
* Enter the command `cmake .`.
* Enter the command `make`.

### Windows
Windows will require [mingw64](http://mingw-w64.yaxm.org/doku.php) in 
order to compile for Windows. Note that you may need to add the MinGW `bin`
directory to your environment variable `%path%`. 

Once you have installed MinGW, follow the steps below:

* Generate MinGW Makefiles with CMake GUI.
* Open `cmd` to the project build location specified in CMake.
* Type `mingw32-make`.
* There may be a few warnings, but LuaDB should compile.

## Lua APIs
LuaDB provides a number of specialized Lua APIs for reading and responding
to HTTP and JSON requests and accessing your application's persistent data.

The modules listed in sub-headers below are the global library modules
which are always defined in a LuaDB environment.

### `db` global
The `db` global object is a shortcut for the default LMDB `Environment` 
object. This global has the same API as objects of that type as listed below.

Lua scripts running in the environment are encouraged not to modify the
value of the `db` global. Rather, system administrators should set the
default environment in the LuaDB configuration file.

### `http` module
The `http` module is a global available in the state for instances of LuaDB
serving FastCGI requests. It provides clients with required APIs to read
an HTTP request and respond appropriately.

* `http.request` - HTTP request object
    * `http.request.method` - Stores the HTTP request method (e.g. `POST`, 
      `GET`, etc.)
    * `http.request.query` - Table storing query parameters mapped to their
      values.
    * `http.request.headers` - Table storing HTTP headers mapped to their
      values.
    * `http.request.body` - The entire body of the HTTP request as a string.
* `http.response` - Response object which will be read from the environment
  once the Lua script has finished serving the request.
    * `http.response.headers` - Table storing HTTP headers sent back to the
      client
    * `http.response.body` - Response body as a string
    * `http.response.status` - Response status code as a string (default: 200)
* `http.redirect(loc)` - Issue a 301 Response to redirect the client to
  the URI given as the `loc` parameter.
* `http.abort(stat)` - Issue a default (empty) response of the code given
  as the `stat` parameter

### `json` module
The `json` library provided by LuaDB allows callers to decode JSON from
a string and encode Lua objects as JSON.

* `json.decode(str)` - Decode a JSON value from a string into a valid Lua 
  value. Objects are decoded as tables. Arrays are decoded as 1-indexed 
  tables. All other values are converted to their natural Lua equivalents.
* `json.encode(val)` - Encode the Lua input value as valid JSON. Note that 
  since JSON cannot encode every Lua value, there are certain types of 
  values which will produce a Lua error.  
  Table keys may only be strings and numeric values. Tables are only created
  as JSON arrays if they are endowed with the Lua metafield `_json_array`, 
  which the `json` module function `makearray` can give. Callers can test 
  if a table will be considered as a JSON array by using the function 
  `isarray`.  
  Attempting to encode a value which would produce a reference cycle will 
  produce a Lua error.
* `json.makearray(table)` - Endow a Lua table with the `_json_array` 
  metafield, to force the `json` module to consider it as a JSON array.
* `json.isarray(obj)` - Returns `true` if the input argument is a table and
  that table possesses the metafield `_json_array`. Returns `false` otherwise.

### `lmdb` module
The `lmdb` module provides access to LMDB databases on the environment. Note
that scripts are suggested against long-running transactions.

* `lmdb.open(env, [opts])` - Open a new LMDB `Env` (single database file). 
  The available options are thus:
    * TODO
* `lmdb.version()` - Return the LMDB version that this build of LuaDB was
  built against.
* `lmdb.Env` - LMDB `Env`(ironments) represent a single database file on
  the host file system. 
    * `lmdb.Env:begin()`
    * `lmdb.Env:close()` - Close the environment out. Once this function
      has been called, any additional calls to `Env` methods will produce
      a Lua error.
    * `lmdb.Env:copy()` 
    * `lmdb.Env:info()` - Return some internal data about the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:flags()` - Return flags used to create the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:max_key_size()` - Return the maximum key size in bytes.
    * `lmdb.Env:max_readers()` - Return the maximum number of readers.
    * `lmdb.Env:path()` - Return the path used to open the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:readers()` - Return an array of strings describing active 
      readers.
    * `lmdb.Env:reader_check()` - Check for stale entries in the reader
      lock table. Return the number of those entries.
    * `lmdb.Env:stat()` - Return a table of statistics about the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:sync([force])` - Flush data buffers to disk. 
* `lmdb.Transaction` - A single LMDB transaction.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:commit()` - Commit any pending changes in the
      transaction.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:cursor([...])` - Provide a new cursor to use on this
      transaction. Callers can specify zero or more keys to use as a range
      prefix for the cursor.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:delete(...)` - Delete the value located at the 
      given key.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:get(...)` - Get the value located at the given key.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:put(val, ...)` - Put the given value at the given key.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:rollback()` - Roll back any changes made in the 
      transaction.
* `lmdb.Cursor` - Cursor used to iterate over keys in a `Transaction`. Note
  that if a cursor is called with parameters, these keys will be used as a
  range prefix.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:close()` - Close this cursor.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:delete()` - Delete the current key/value pair.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:first()` - Seek to the first key in the cursor.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:item()` - Return a table with `key` and `value` elements.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:key()` - Return the current key as an array.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:last()` - Seek to the last key in the cursor.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:next()` - Move the cursor forward one element.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:prev()` - Move the cursor forward one element.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:value()` - Return the current Lua value.

## License
MIT License - see LICENSE file provided in the project root for more details
of the licenses of bundled code.

## Resources
 * [Lua](http://www.lua.org) - detailed documentation of C and Lua APIs
 * [Lua-Users.org](http://lua-users.org) - excellent Wiki and mailing lists
 * [Symas LMDB](http://symas.com/mdb/) - key-value store used by LuaDB
 * [CCAN](http://www.ccodearchive.net) - source of JSON module used in LuaDB
 * [FastCGI](http://www.fastcgi.com) - source of FastCGI C module
 * [mingw64](http://mingw-w64.yaxm.org/doku.php) - GCC for Windows
 * [CMake](http://www.cmake.org) - cross-platform make specification tool

Commit message:

Create new module `uuid` to create Universally Unique Identifiers within Lua Add some documentation regarding configuration files

README.md, after:

# LuaDB

## Getting Started
To get started, clone this repository on your local computer:

    git clone github.com/chrisrink10/luadb
    
You'll need a copy of [CMake](http://www.cmake.org) to generate the 
appropriate makefiles for your system. 

Follow the steps laid out below for your System.

### OS X and Other UNIX-like Systems
Follow these steps to compile LuaDB:

* Open a command prompt (such as `Terminal` for OS X) to your project 
  build location.
* Enter the command `cmake .`.
* Enter the command `make`.

### Windows
Windows will require [mingw64](http://mingw-w64.yaxm.org/doku.php) in 
order to compile for Windows. Note that you may need to add the MinGW `bin`
directory to your environment variable `%path%`. 

Once you have installed MinGW, follow the steps below:

* Generate MinGW Makefiles with CMake GUI.
* Open `cmd` to the project build location specified in CMake.
* Type `mingw32-make`.
* There may be a few warnings, but LuaDB should compile.

## Configuration
LuaDB environment configuration is specified via configuration files 
written in - unsurprisingly - JSON format. For UNIX-like operating systems,
that configuration file will be located at `/etc/luadb/luadb.json`. For
Windows, it will be `%installdir%\luadb.json`. 

The JSON format should be as one object, with each key representing an
environment configuration and each value being another JSON object. Callers
may specify a default configuration for the environment in one of two ways:

 * Specifying a `"_default": "config_name"` key-value pair in the JSON
   configuration.
 * Specifying a `-c config_name` flag when starting the application.
 
In all other cases, LuaDB will use its own default configuration, which is
compiled into the binary (and thus the configuration file need not exist).
Note that configurations *may not be hot swapped*. That is, the LuaDB 
environment must be brought down to switch configurations.

## Lua APIs
LuaDB provides a number of specialized Lua APIs for reading and responding
to HTTP and JSON requests and accessing your application's persistent data.

The modules listed in sub-headers below are the global library modules
which are always defined in a LuaDB environment.

### `db` global
The `db` global object is a shortcut for the default LMDB `Environment` 
object. This global has the same API as objects of that type as listed below.

Lua scripts running in the environment are encouraged not to modify the
value of the `db` global. Rather, system administrators should set the
default environment in the LuaDB configuration file.

### `http` module
The `http` module is a global available in the state for instances of LuaDB
serving FastCGI requests. It provides clients with required APIs to read
an HTTP request and respond appropriately.

* `http.request` - HTTP request object
    * `http.request.method` - Stores the HTTP request method (e.g. `POST`, 
      `GET`, etc.)
    * `http.request.query` - Table storing query parameters mapped to their
      values.
    * `http.request.headers` - Table storing HTTP headers mapped to their
      values.
    * `http.request.body` - The entire body of the HTTP request as a string.
* `http.response` - Response object which will be read from the environment
  once the Lua script has finished serving the request.
    * `http.response.headers` - Table storing HTTP headers sent back to the
      client
    * `http.response.body` - Response body as a string
    * `http.response.status` - Response status code as a string (default: 200)
* `http.redirect(loc)` - Issue a 301 Response to redirect the client to
  the URI given as the `loc` parameter.
* `http.abort(stat)` - Issue a default (empty) response of the code given
  as the `stat` parameter

### `json` module
The `json` library provided by LuaDB allows callers to decode JSON from
a string and encode Lua objects as JSON.

* `json.decode(str)` - Decode a JSON value from a string into a valid Lua 
  value. Objects are decoded as tables. Arrays are decoded as 1-indexed 
  tables. All other values are converted to their natural Lua equivalents.
* `json.encode(val)` - Encode the Lua input value as valid JSON. Note that 
  since JSON cannot encode every Lua value, there are certain types of 
  values which will produce a Lua error.  
  Table keys may only be strings and numeric values. Tables are only created
  as JSON arrays if they are endowed with the Lua metafield `_json_array`, 
  which the `json` module function `makearray` can give. Callers can test 
  if a table will be considered as a JSON array by using the function 
  `isarray`.  
  Attempting to encode a value which would produce a reference cycle will 
  produce a Lua error.
* `json.makearray(table)` - Endow a Lua table with the `_json_array` 
  metafield, to force the `json` module to consider it as a JSON array.
* `json.isarray(obj)` - Returns `true` if the input argument is a table and
  that table possesses the metafield `_json_array`. Returns `false` otherwise.

### `lmdb` module
The `lmdb` module provides access to LMDB databases on the environment. Note
that scripts are suggested against long-running transactions.

* `lmdb.open(env, [opts])` - Open a new LMDB `Env` (single database file). 
  The available options are thus:
    * TODO
* `lmdb.version()` - Return the LMDB version that this build of LuaDB was
  built against.
* `lmdb.Env` - LMDB `Env`(ironments) represent a single database file on
  the host file system. 
    * `lmdb.Env:begin()`
    * `lmdb.Env:close()` - Close the environment out. Once this function
      has been called, any additional calls to `Env` methods will produce
      a Lua error.
    * `lmdb.Env:copy()` 
    * `lmdb.Env:info()` - Return some internal data about the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:flags()` - Return flags used to create the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:max_key_size()` - Return the maximum key size in bytes.
    * `lmdb.Env:max_readers()` - Return the maximum number of readers.
    * `lmdb.Env:path()` - Return the path used to open the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:readers()` - Return an array of strings describing active 
      readers.
    * `lmdb.Env:reader_check()` - Check for stale entries in the reader
      lock table. Return the number of those entries.
    * `lmdb.Env:stat()` - Return a table of statistics about the environment.
    * `lmdb.Env:sync([force])` - Flush data buffers to disk. 
* `lmdb.Transaction` - A single LMDB transaction.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:commit()` - Commit any pending changes in the
      transaction.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:cursor([...])` - Provide a new cursor to use on this
      transaction. Callers can specify zero or more keys to use as a range
      prefix for the cursor.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:delete(...)` - Delete the value located at the 
      given key.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:get(...)` - Get the value located at the given key.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:put(val, ...)` - Put the given value at the given key.
    * `lmdb.Transaction:rollback()` - Roll back any changes made in the 
      transaction.
* `lmdb.Cursor` - Cursor used to iterate over keys in a `Transaction`. Note
  that if a cursor is called with parameters, these keys will be used as a
  range prefix.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:close()` - Close this cursor.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:delete()` - Delete the current key/value pair.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:first()` - Seek to the first key in the cursor.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:item()` - Return a table with `key` and `value` elements.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:key()` - Return the current key as an array.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:last()` - Seek to the last key in the cursor.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:next()` - Move the cursor forward one element.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:prev()` - Move the cursor forward one element.
    * `lmdb.Cursor:value()` - Return the current Lua value.

### `uuid` module
The `uuid` module provides an easy way to produce Universally Unique 
Identifiers in your LuaDB environment.

* `uuid.uuid()` - Generate a UUID string. Returns `nil` if there was an error.

## License
MIT License - see LICENSE file provided in the project root for more details
of the licenses of bundled code.

## Resources
 * [Lua](http://www.lua.org) - detailed documentation of C and Lua APIs
 * [Lua-Users.org](http://lua-users.org) - excellent Wiki and mailing lists
 * [Symas LMDB](http://symas.com/mdb/) - key-value store used by LuaDB
 * [CCAN](http://www.ccodearchive.net) - source of JSON module used in LuaDB
 * [FastCGI](http://www.fastcgi.com) - source of FastCGI C module
 * [mingw64](http://mingw-w64.yaxm.org/doku.php) - GCC for Windows
 * [CMake](http://www.cmake.org) - cross-platform make specification tool
